Cmd.exe
Commandline:

Basic System Information:

set: to check your path from the command line
The terminal output below shows the path where MS Windows will execute commands, as indicated by the line starting with Path=.

ver: to determine the operating system (OS) version.

systeminfo: list various information about the system such as OS information, system details, processor and memory.

you can pipe it through more if the output is too long. Then, you can view it page after page by pressing the space bar button. To demonstrate this, try running driverquery and compare it with running driverquery | more. In the latter, you can display the output page by page and you can exit it using CTRL + C.

help - Provides help information for a specific command
cls - Clears the Command Prompt screen.

Network Configuration:

You can check your network information using ipconfig. The terminal output below shows our IP address, subnet mask, and default gateway.

You can also use ipconfig /all for more information about your network configuration. As shown in the terminal below, we can view our DNS servers and confirm that DHCP is enabled.

Network Troubleshooting:

One common troubleshooting task is checking if the server can access a particular server on the Internet. The command syntax is ping target_name. Inspired by ping-pong, we send a specific ICMP packet and listen for a response. If a response is received, we know that we can reach the target and that the target can reach us.

Another valuable tool for troubleshooting is tracert, which stands for trace route. The command tracert target_name traces the network route traversed to reach the target. Without getting into more details, it expects the routers on the path to notify us if they drop a packet because its time-to-live (TTL) has reached zero.

One networking command worth knowing is nslookup. It looks up a host or domain and returns its IP address. The syntax nslookup example.com will look up example.com using the default name server; however, nslookup example.com 1.1.1.1 will use the name server one.one.one.one. The terminal below shows the output of both commands.

netstat: command with no arguments will show you established connections
-a displays all established connections and listening ports
-b shows the program associated with each listening port and established connection
-o reveals the process ID (PID) associated with the connection
-n uses a numerical form for addresses and port numbers
We combine these four options and execute the netstat -abon command.

Working With Directories:

You can use cd without parameters to display the current drive and directory. It is the equivalent of asking the system, where am I?

You can view the child directories using dir.

dir /a - Displays hidden and system files as well.
dir /s - Displays files in the current directory and all subdirectories.
You can type tree to visually represent the child directories and subdirectories.

You can change to any directory by using the command cd target_directory; this is equivalent to double-clicking the target_directory on your desktop. Furthermore, you can use cd .. to go up one level. An example is shown in the terminal output below.

To create a directory, use mkdir directory_name; mkdir stands for make directory. To delete a directory, use rmdir directory_name; rmdir stands for remove directory. The terminal output below shows creating and deleting a directory.

Working With Files:

You are working with the command line. You are curious about the contents of a particular text file. You can easily view text files with the command type. This command will dump the contents of the text file on the screen; this is convenient for files that fit within your terminal window. You might want to consider more for longer text files. This command will display enough text file contents to fill your terminal window. In other words, for long text files, more will display a single page and wait for you to press Spacebar to move by one page (flip the page) or Enter to move by one line.

The copy command allows you to copy files from one location to another.
Similarly, you can move files using the move command.
Finally, we can delete a file using del or erase.

We can use the wildcard character * to refer to multiple files. For example, copy *.md C:\Markdown will copy all files with the extension md to the directory C:\Markdown.

Task and Process Management:

You must be familiar with MS Windows Task Manager and might be familiar with killing non-responsive processes. Let’s discover how to achieve a similar functionality using the command line.

We can list the running processes using tasklist.

Some filtering is helpful because the output is expected to be very long. You can check all available filters by displaying the help page using tasklist /?. Let’s say that we want to search for tasks related to sshd.exe, we can do that with the command tasklist /FI "imagename eq sshd.exe". Note that /FI is used to set the filter image name equals sshd.exe.

tasklist /FI "imagename eq sshd.exe"

With the process ID (PID) known, we can terminate any task using taskkill /PID target_pid. For example, if we want to kill the process with PID 4567, we would issue the command taskkill /PID 4567.

taskkill /PID 4567.

The command shutdown /s can shut down a system.
shutdown /? | more
